TRANSCRIPT: lakebase-keynote
Generated: 2026-03-25 13:56:06
============================================================

 All right. My name is Nikita Shamg enough. I'm going to talk about legbase. So I run legbase as VP of engineering here at Databricks. Let's talk about some of the objectives for legbase and also the top challenges. So this brings me to iterate what actually a legbase is. So legbase postgres is our product and legbase is a new category of operational databases which is built on top of the leg. Ali just published a blog post about the new category of databases called legbases. And the main idea is that we separate computing storage, computers, postgres and storage is leghouse. So teams can scale it instantly, control costs. And the important thing there that storage is very cheap and abundant, it's leg, it's elastic. So you don't have any any limits on the database size. And then compute is elastic postgres. So all your application ecosystem works, all your drivers, all your applications. So if you want to migrate from some other postgres servers to get all the benefits of legbase. So you can just re-point your application into legbase and it's guaranteed to work. Why this is a big deal? It is a big deal for a variety of reasons. And I think the big one, the biggest kind of driver to why you want to use legbase versus something else is AI. And with AI, your application development velocity increases dramatically. And legbase has all this properties such as autoscaling, branching and a force postgres that makes AI software development lifecycle faster. The alternative are traditional databases where you kind of forced to choose between performance cost and agility. And legbase kind of removes all those tradeoffs. So you give a serverless engine. We sometimes say database is just a URL that scales automatically. And in the world of more and more software being created and more and more new tools are being created. Being certain is such an important property. And then all your software development lifecycle and it could be driven by humans or it could be driven by AI can be done using instant database branching with legbase. So you can build your software faster and deploy faster. One of the big challenges for us is that we are now selling to a new persona. So let's just identify what kind of new personas we're talking to. Some of them are overlapping with our existing performer personas such as enterprise architects and DBAs and CIOs. But there is a new persona that we are catering to. And that new persona is a developer or product builder, backend engineers, VPs of engineers, product managers. So how do we break in there? Well, let's start with the personas that we already want. So look at what the data innovators. So people who are working on the data bridge platform. I guarantee you to have needs for application development and they have needs for real time data sorting. And that's our persona number one. We can definitely win those because basically those are the people who are using the data bridge platform who need postgres and therefore they need legbase. And it's right there. So when they need to build something that requires real time serving, they can push a button and get legbase. So we need to make sure that they don't go elsewhere to some other part of their organization. They can just consume legbase right there and then. The second one is gatekeepers where that's where all the objections come in. Is it reliable? Does it have a chain? Does it have DR? How does it compare to my alternative? Usually AWS or Azure? And yada yada yada yada. So there's going to be a lot of objections handling. But the goal here that those gatekeepers turn on our side and then standardize legbase inside their organization. So this is a long game and the first in years to get through the gate allow people to consume legbase. And then graduate to being the standard. Oltp or even the standard postgres inside the organization. That's where we're going to see something competition again. Like I said, we're going to see Azure Postgres and we're going to see AWS, RDS and Aurora. The final one is the product builders. So if the gatekeepers let's legbase through the gate, I guarantee you that the product builders will like it. Because their alternative is a clunky. And so what we need to make sure that the product builders who are building those revenue driving apps, both internal and external are aware that legbase exists. The gatekeepers allow them to log into Databricks so they have a log into Databricks. And we've educated them of how to use legbase. And again, they're developers. So they know how to use databases. They know how to use Postgres. So how the battle is won. But then we need to show them and explain why this is better. And then encourage them to try. So let's talk about core capabilities and differentiators of legbase. So the first and most important thing that it is separation of storage and compute. And as you can see on this icon on the right hand side of the screen, we have the link on top of it. We have a low latency storage. Almost think about it as kind of a very low latency caching tier on top of the lake. And one of the common objections then we tell the legbase story is like, oh, can an Oultipy system be fast because the lake is slow from the latency perspective. But no transaction on legbase has the object store has the lake on the critical execution path of the transaction. So because you always hit this low latency storage tier. And then there's elastic compute. So storage is elastic. Lake is elastic and bottomless. Compute is low latency elastic and bottomless serving is a cash on top of the lake. And then I mean storage and then compute is Postgres. And it's also elastic as we've implemented out of scale. So there aren't any bottlenecks in the system. So you can scale it very cost efficiently up and down. When we talk about the new persona and the new persona is a developer. What do developers want? Well, developers want to deploy their software that they're building. They need infrastructure that powers that software to be robust. They also live in this software development lifecycle inner loop where you create a new repository, a new branch in your repository. You build a feature. You run through a CI CE process of testing your feature and then you deploy into production. And so what developers value tremendously is that infrastructure is with you throughout that inner loop of software development. And with databases that hasn't been the case before and it's changing with leg base. The reason to that is that the key feature of leg base is branching. And branching gives you an instant zero copy isolation that has teams of developers build without touching the production and live workloads. So every developer can create their in a federal environment very, very quickly. On demand that can create it, they can decommission it and then have desk, the dev test staging branches created very, very quickly without the source duplication. And that's why it's instant as well. So it's kind of like Git style workflow for data. And it allows you to take your database and integrate in your in the software development lifecycle. This is one of the biggest differentiating features of leg base. Nobody else has it. Nobody else has it is good. And basically our most engaged customers love it and swear by it. The other thing I want to talk about is recovery and backups. So how do you. Backups is kind of like a check box feature where people just want to make sure that you know in the case of a disaster. We we can go back and restore from backup to a particular point in time. Or like we're not going to lose data if something like catastrophic happens. And catastrophic things can happen at the infrastructure level or they can happen in. You know a human mistake. You ran a command against the database that that destroyed something. And therefore you want to go back and potentially restore from a previous point in time. Now those operations are typically incredibly scary, right? And they happen when you're woken up in the middle of the night because of the disaster. And then you pushing this button that will roll back to your database to some prior point in time. And it's kind of unsafe right because you know you you you kind of lose in data no matter what's in that in that point. And each operation with the legacy software is very slow. So restoring from a backup is you know. 10s of minutes, maybe 30 minutes, maybe an hour. And during that time your primary business application drives your businesses down. So people don't tolerate this very well. With lay base our backups and recovery with snapshots are instant. So it's instance to create backups. You can do it on a schedule. You can do it with with an API call. And you can restore either to a precise point in time or to a specific snapshot. And you can do it instantly. Finally, you can always validate. So when you restoring something, you can restore to a branch. Validate that this is what you want. And only then restore to the main database. The third thing you want to talk about is auto scaling with scaling to zero. So why do you need scale to zero? Why don't you just scale to something small? Well, the reality is that there is a tremendous number of database instances now created by individual developers and agents. So in the past we had one production database and maybe one staging database. And all the developers are working with staging database conflicted because they want to modify it. They want to change scheme or differently from one developer to another. The new world is very different. You have a production database probably one per region. So that's already like 10-20. You have more applications than one. So you multiply that 20 by the number of applications, both internal and external. And so depending on the size of the company, you might have tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands of applications. So you take that multiplied by 20. And then each one has staging. So you multiply it by two. And then every developer might want to take staging and branch it into their developer environment. So you multiply it by the number of developers. So that number is becoming very big. Now you start replacing developers with agents and looking at how cheap now, how inexpensive it is now to build a new application. So my, the number of applications keeps going up. The number of environments for developing those applications keeps going up. The number of developers maybe is not going up, but if you replace developers with agents, well that's going up as well. So now it was economically infeasible to give each one of those developers or agents. Multiply by the number of environments, a dedicated instance that, but now it is. And that's why we have auto scaling and scaling to zero. And the important thing is that the interaction with creating those branches and scaling them is instant. So because of that separation of storage and compute, and because of some hardcore engineering that we've put together, each one of the every management operation is instant creating instance, creating a branch, creating a snapshot, restoring from a snapshot, scaling a branch, all of those are instant. Let's talk about scalability. And it's one thing to develop software and it's a very different thing to put it in production and scale to real world workloads. So with lay base, we can create and provision database instances. We can put them in production as they are in production and the real world traffic hits them will scale and will scale them automatically. And then in addition to this, it's straightforward instant and we can do it without duplicating data. We can create additional compute and so we can stand up read replicas, with scale independently from the main instance to give you horizontal read scalability. Typically, or at least in some web workloads, the ratio between reason rights could be one to 10 or one to 100. And so therefore there's so many more reads than rights. And we can instantly stand up read replicas to address the scalability needs of a modern workload. So let's talk about platform. Right. Lay based on its own stands on its own and it's a great product and developers love it. They're recently launching 60,000 instances of lay base per day. So it's a very high, like there's lots of demand for it and we excited about it. But when we go and talk about it with larger enterprises, the integration story, the government story and kind of sharing and integrating with the rest of the data rich stock is a gigantic value proposition. So with lay based now, we can run operational workloads on the same platform and data is stored in the same lake. It is stored in a different format and it's an important thing to understand, but it is stored in the same lake. And with that, our operational data is immediately available without copying to analytics or to various ETL pipelines. So in this picture on the right hand side of the screen, you see that you can take lake house and all the lake house compute, whatever that might be, as far or DB SQL and you can access live data that is stored in lake house. And then as you set things up, you can put governance on top of that data as well for auditing and policies across all the data. Let's talk about the roadmap. So, lake base is GA. So the only question that you should ask yourself is, is a GA in my region and is a GA in my cloud? So let's talk about that as well. So today it's available on AWS only, but Azure is coming on March 4th. So very, very soon. With that, we give you up to 16 terabytes of storage that's generally available. We give you high-auto scaling limits that's generally available. And we give you the ability to synchronize data to delta tables. Now, when we kind of looked at the previous slide and I was saying, well, you can use lake house compute directly on lake base data. And sometimes people want that, but some other times people want to synchronize data between operational data to in lake base to delta tables. That is available in public preview and you can set it up and try it today. And also give you scheduled snapshots. That's when I was talking about backup and restore feature. Now, as you go into kind of heavier enterprise and you talk into banks and you talk into mission critical workloads, the feature requests that you will almost certainly hear about are customer managed keys and compliance. So keepers. So talking about compliance, keep in stock to a generally available fed RAM is in the works. And when we talk about customer managed keys, they are a public preview. So you can walk into enterprise accounts with high compliance and security requirements and be sure that lake base addresses your customer concerns. And I was saying earlier that Azure is available in much fourth. I'm realizing that by that time it it's by the time you are seeing this recording, then Azure will be generally available as well. As you guys all know, database acquired neon in June last year. And how should we think about neon and lake base brands? So neon is out there. It's on the neon.com domain and it's our PLG vehicle. What is PLG product led growth? So neon is locked by developers. They go to neon.com sign up and swipe a credit card and grow organically. So we currently having 5,000 signups per day and every day is a record. So just a few weeks ago, we were at 4,000. And now we had 5,000 signups. There are 60,000 new databases on the neon platform created per day. And neon and lake base running in the same infrastructure. It's the same thing under the hood. We are getting some of the large signifing customers to come through the lake base funnel. So here I want to mention meta Amazon PayPal by the end door to ash Microsoft. So, you know, Amazon and Microsoft some teams have tested it right because they're competing with us. Some teams are using it and I know Amazon. Some of the Amazon products used it. So it's a. It's starting to generate some significant usage. I think meta is at the half a million dollars a year right now fully organically. And then there are smaller customers fire blogs pure gym raft labs big ID, etc. But those are enterprise customers. So we should think about it as that. Me and is a start of a funnel that allows us to. To reach out to reach to the to this set of customers that potentially that most likely are not on the data breaks platform today. I know the bigger ones are. But the fact that we have a bigger funnel and now we can bring that funnel into into data breaks is. It is an important thing. But fundamentally, lake base is where we want all our customers, or at least all the like. Real customers, not $20 per month customers to be. And we'll be using me and funnel as the top of the funnel. Motion and bring customers into late base. So now let me show you a demo. Here I'm logging in into data breaks. And on the right hand side, I have this app switcher where I can go ahead and choose a lake based post guess. So once I click that. I can see all the instances created by our team. And then I can click the new project. And that's called this project demo. You can see that you can choose post this version. You can configure your production instance to scale between eight and 16 c use. And then you can choose serverless usage policy. And then you can click create and instantly you have your instance. That instance is. As a default compute size, but the most important thing is the connect button. And once you click the connect button, you take this URL and you can plug it into your application. So you can make your application live in the matter of seconds. So let's go and demonstrate a handful of features that we have here on late base. And the first one that I want to show you is branches. Before I do that, let's interact with the database and insert a handful of records into the system. So here I created a table that's called playing the late base. I'm selecting 10 records out of the that table here, the R. And so imagine that this table is now live. It's in powers your application. And it's in production. So there's a read and write traffic that's happening that's hitting this like base instance. And then new records are being created, modified, read from this table live. If I'm a developer, I can go on branches and create my sandbox environment here. I can say create new branch. We can call this branch Nikita dash dev. But here this branch is created. The URL for interacting with this branch to connect my testing environment to it is right here. And then I can go and do whatever I want in that environment, I will not impact production. So I can click on this view called tables. This is all my data. I can see I'm in the branch called Nikita dev. So I can do things like I can I can truncate this table or I can drop this table completely. And as I drop this table, if this was a production environment, I would be to leading production data. But it's my sandbox environment. So it doesn't really matter me, me deleting that data. So I can go back into the branches view and then click on my branch and say, hey, what are the differences between my development branch and the production branch from the schema standpoint. And you can see that I deleted a whole bunch of schema, like this data, this table only exists in the production branch and does not exist in the development branch. And this may not something that I want to do. And if I change my mind, I can always rethink my development branch with the parent. And now those things are identical again, and this operation happened instantly. Similarly to branches and let's go back to the production branch. You can click on backup restore and start creating snapshots and creating those snapshots, which is a full backup of your system. And a full backup that you can go to and restore from that backup. You can create that instantly. And then there's a restore button that you can restore this and it can restore it safely into a separate branch of that database. So we're making operations instant and we were making this operations safe with ladies. So the final thing I want to show you that if you go on branches, here's my production branch. You can click the edit button and that allows you to change the boundaries of compute. And once you change the boundaries of compute, it will impact database operations. But only for a second or so. But then your compute has a wide range for out of scale. So this is a feature that does not exist on Azure Postgres. This is a feature that does not exist in RDS. It's incredibly easy to use. And it gives your developers the peace of mind that they both saving costs because they are not provisioning their database for peak. And if you choose to choose spikes in traffic arrive, their database will temporarily increase the size and service that spike of traffic. This concludes my Lake based demo. If you have any additional questions, you can always ask them in the channel called APA late base. And I'm keeping me directly. It's Nikita Shamganoff on Slack and I'm incredibly responsive and online 24 by 7.